Blog: I didn't understand the OS I built with AI until the MCP gave it analytics (#17317)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/joe-os-analytics.md

---

> date: 2026-06-05

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2026-08-05
```

- Oblique Strategies — Brian Eno's deck of creative prompts, plus a few dozen I wrote myself to build it out more.
- A rotating daily joke, a random fractal, and a Sky panel showing the current moon phase, sunrise, and sunset.
- And Vigil.

Vigil is the most ambitious part of Joe-OS.

It's a tiny medieval roguelike text adventure about a knight keeping watch over a dying realm. Every turn something happens — a ghoul rises, a house burns, a bandit approaches — and you respond by choosing an Honorable or a Craven option. Sometimes you get a third choice based on your inventory or companions, each of which has their own simple personality.

It runs across five acts and 400+ hand-written events, with a two-and-a-half minute cooldown between choices during which the world breathes by giving you a slow trickle of flavour events.

When your knight finally dies, you choose their last words, and those words shape the knight who takes up the watch next. It is not a game you rush. It's something you keep half an eye on while you wait for a meeting to start and games are intended to last weeks.

> ![joke panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/06_joke_0b212d071d.png) ![moon panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/08_sky_2a93713f2a.png) ![vigil panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/08_sky_2a93713f2a.png)

Reviewer: 1. You didn't upload the vigil screenshot
2. I expected to see only vigil screenshots at the bottom of this section
3. Maybe lets split Vigil out so we can focus on the other modes then give Vigil it's time to shine, because it sounds awesome
4. We can use the `<ImageSlider>` component to show multiple, this might require converting to mdx

```suggestion
<ImageSlider>

![joke panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/06_joke_0b212d071d.png) 

![moon panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/08_sky_2a93713f2a.png) 

![oblique panel]()

</ImageSlider>

The most ambitious part of Joe-OS was Vigil

It's a tiny medieval roguelike text adventure about a knight keeping watch over a dying realm. Every turn something happens — a ghoul rises, a house burns, a bandit approaches — and you respond by choosing an Honorable or a Craven option. Sometimes you get a third choice based on your inventory or companions, each of which has their own simple personality.

It runs across five acts and 400+ hand-written events, with a two-and-a-half minute cooldown between choices during which the world breathes by giving you a slow trickle of flavour events.

When your knight finally dies, you choose their last words, and those words shape the knight who takes up the watch next. It is not a game you rush. It's something you keep half an eye on while you wait for a meeting to start and games are intended to last weeks.

![vigil panel]()
```

## Modern coding is mostly copy-and-paste

> The whole thing was built in plain English, in conversation with Claude. I'd describe what I wanted — a new panel, a layout tweak, a bug to chase — and it would write the MicroPython, flash it to the device over USB, and read the logs back when something broke. For the bigger pieces, like expanding Vigil, I'd put it in plan mode first, so it thought through the structure before touching a single file. For everything small, I just said the thing and watched it land a few seconds later.

Reviewer: I think the explanation of plan mode is a bit redudant
```suggestion
The whole thing was built in plain English, in conversation with Claude. I'd describe what I wanted — a new panel, a layout tweak, a bug to chase — and it would write the MicroPython, flash it to the device over USB, and read the logs back when something broke. For the bigger pieces, like expanding Vigil, I'd put it in plan mode first, but for everything small, I just said the thing and watched it land a few seconds later.
```

Initially my prompts were not precise. Most were vibes — _"make the moon panel a bit nicer and more in keeping with the aesthetic."_ Some were just _"the clock is five minutes slow,"_ with a photo of the screen attached. The rhythm never changed: ask, flash, see what it actually did, report back.

This was a necessary pattern because, while AI helped me ship this thing, I didn't always understand the thing I shipped and the AI is only as good as what you can tell it. "_It's broken_" isn't as powerful as "_It hangs at the weather fetch, here's the boot log for you to debug_"..

The bottleneck in non-technical building isn't building anymore — it's _diagnosis_. And diagnosis is just data you haven't collected yet.

> So the more of my code an AI does, the more I need a backend telling me — and it — what's actually happening. That's the opposite of what you'd assume. You'd think tools like Claude make analytics less necessary. For people like me, they make it _more_.

Reviewer: Backend isn't quite the right word
```suggestion
So the more of my code an AI writes, the more I need something telling me — and it — what's actually happening. That's the opposite of what you'd assume. You'd think tools like Claude make analytics less necessary. For people like me, they make it _more_.
```

## Setting up PostHog

> Which is why the last thing I added was PostHog.

Reviewer: I think maybe an interesting bit to fill out a bit more is that people usually think of analytics for a website or app they are releasing to other people, but it's also relevant if you're just building something for yourself because often times that data is not accessible.

Reviewer: One other things, is that it seems from the above section that you are going to use PostHog to debug your device and apps, but then you just use it for analytics of various kinds. Did you use it for debugging at all (logging, errors)? 

I think either way, might need tweaking for consistency.

Reviewer: Basically, I expected the section below to be way different, about the debugging experience rather than analytics. Like MCP was used to build dashboards, but not so much to improve it?

There are a lot of ways to [install PostHog](/wizard), but I did this with one sentence: _"Add PostHog to track usage, games played, and errors."_

Claude wrote a small capture client that batches events in memory and ships them over WiFi without ever blocking the screen, then wired it through the whole OS. I pasted in a project key. That was the entirety of the install experience.

> The more interesting part happened next, through the [PostHog MCP](/docs/model-context-protocol) — a connector that lets Claude talk to my PostHog project directly. I never opened the PostHog UI. I just asked, and Claude found my new project, confirmed events were arriving, built two pinned dashboards, and filled them with fifteen [insights](/docs/product-analytics/insights) — all from plain English.

Reviewer: 1. I think people can figure out what MCP does from your explanation here. 
2. You say you never had to open the UI, but then you said it built dashboards and insights which are only relevant if you are opening the UI

```suggestion
The more interesting part happened next, through the [PostHog MCP](/docs/model-context-protocol). With it, I never had to open the PostHog UI. I just asked, and Claude found my new project, confirmed events were arriving, built two pinned dashboards, and filled them with fifteen [insights](/docs/product-analytics/insights) – all from plain English.
```

![Vigil dashboard](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/vigil_dashboard_1e866cdf61.png)

The device now reports boots, which panels I actually visit and for how long, every honour-or-craven choice my knights make, which companions I recruit, where they die, and a temperature and CO2 reading every five minutes. One dashboard tracks device health — errors grouped by where they fired, CO2 plotted against the same thresholds the OS uses to colour its own display. Another dashboard tracks interactions in Vigil.

> None of it touched a SQL query or a chart builder. I described what I wanted to know, and the data was waiting for me when I looked.

Reviewer: The MCP touched the SQL queries and chart builder so this sentence doesn't quite make sense.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Shipping isn't maintaining

I'm not going to pretend I'm an engineer now. I do enough of that on LinkedIn. But the gap between "I have an idea" and "it's running on hardware on my desk" has collapsed, and it'll keep collapsing for people like me. It's genuinely exciting.

> What hasn't changed is everything that happens after "it works." A thing that runs is not a thing you understand. The instrumentation is what lets me, and the AI I build with, keep something alive that neither of us could have written alone.

Reviewer: Again, I don't quite get how PostHog helps you understand your app more. It gave you basic analytics about your choices, but that isn't really effecting the quality of your app as far as I read.

- And Vigil.

Vigil is the most ambitious part of Joe-OS.

It's a tiny medieval roguelike text adventure about a knight keeping watch over a dying realm. Every turn something happens — a ghoul rises, a house burns, a bandit approaches — and you respond by choosing an Honorable or a Craven option. Sometimes you get a third choice based on your inventory or companions, each of which has their own simple personality.

It runs across five acts and 400+ hand-written events, with a two-and-a-half minute cooldown between choices during which the world breathes by giving you a slow trickle of flavour events.

When your knight finally dies, you choose their last words, and those words shape the knight who takes up the watch next. It is not a game you rush. It's something you keep half an eye on while you wait for a meeting to start and games are intended to last weeks.

![joke panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/06_joke_0b212d071d.png) ![moon panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/08_sky_2a93713f2a.png) ![vigil panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/08_sky_2a93713f2a.png)

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

## What I built

I call it Joe-OS, because naming things is the one part of this I'm actually qualified for.

The Presto runs MicroPython. The top two-thirds of the screen is a carousel of panels; the bottom third permanently shows temperature and CO2 from the sensor, with little sparklines of the last half hour. You move between panels by tapping the corners of the screen.

The panels are deliberately a mix of useful and useless:

- Three news readers that stream the latest RSS headlines from The Guardian, BBC News, and Rock, Paper, Shotgun.
- Oblique Strategies — Brian Eno's deck of creative prompts, plus a few dozen I wrote myself to build it out more.
- A rotating daily joke, a random fractal, and a Sky panel showing the current moon phase, sunrise, and sunset.
<ImageSlider>

![joke panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/06_joke_0b212d071d.png) 

![moon panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/08_sky_2a93713f2a.png) 

> ![oblique panel]()

Author: ```suggestion
![rps panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/03_rps_eb3d967928.png)

![oblique panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/04_oblique_7558fce9eb.png)
```

</ImageSlider>

The most ambitious part of Joe-OS was Vigil

It's a tiny medieval roguelike text adventure about a knight keeping watch over a dying realm. Every turn something happens — a ghoul rises, a house burns, a bandit approaches — and you respond by choosing an Honorable or a Craven option. Sometimes you get a third choice based on your inventory or companions, each of which has their own simple personality.

It runs across five acts and 400+ hand-written events, with a two-and-a-half minute cooldown between choices during which the world breathes by giving you a slow trickle of flavour events.

When your knight finally dies, you choose their last words, and those words shape the knight who takes up the watch next. It is not a game you rush. It's something you keep half an eye on while you wait for a meeting to start and games are intended to last weeks.

> ![vigil panel]()

Author: ```suggestion
![vigil panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/09_vigil_43101400fb.png)
```

So the more of my code an AI writes, the more I need something telling me — and it — what's actually happening. That's the opposite of what you'd assume. You'd think tools like Claude make analytics less necessary. For people like me, they make it _more_.

## Setting up PostHog

Which is why the last thing I added was PostHog.

There are a lot of ways to [install PostHog](/wizard), but I did this with one sentence: _"Add PostHog to track usage, games played, and errors."_

Claude wrote a small capture client that batches events in memory and ships them over WiFi without ever blocking the screen, then wired it through the whole OS. I pasted in a project key. That was the entirety of the install experience.

The more interesting part happened next, through the [PostHog MCP](/docs/model-context-protocol). With it, I never had to open the PostHog UI. I just asked, and Claude found my new project, confirmed events were arriving, built two pinned dashboards, and filled them with fifteen [insights](/docs/product-analytics/insights) – all from plain English.

> ![Vigil dashboard](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/vigil_dashboard_1e866cdf61.png)
> 
> The device now reports boots, which panels I actually visit and for how long, every honour-or-craven choice my knights make, which companions I recruit, where they die, and a temperature and CO2 reading every five minutes. One dashboard tracks device health — errors grouped by where they fired, CO2 plotted against the same thresholds the OS uses to colour its own display. Another dashboard tracks interactions in Vigil.
> 
> None of it touched a SQL query or a chart builder. I described what I wanted to know, and the data was waiting for me when I looked.
> 
> ## Shipping isn't maintaining
> 
> I'm not going to pretend I'm an engineer now. I do enough of that on LinkedIn. But the gap between "I have an idea" and "it's running on hardware on my desk" has collapsed, and it'll keep collapsing for people like me. It's genuinely exciting.
> 
> What hasn't changed is everything that happens after "it works." A thing that runs is not a thing you understand. The instrumentation is what lets me, and the AI I build with, keep something alive that neither of us could have written alone.
> 
> Also, my desk now tells me when the CO2 in the room is too high, which explains an enormous amount about my sleepy afternoons.

Author: ```suggestion
## Shipping isn't maintaining

I'm not going to pretend I'm an engineer now. I do enough of that on LinkedIn. But the gap between "I have an idea" and "it's running on hardware on my desk" has collapsed, and it'll keep collapsing for people like me.

Analytics added via PostHog are part of how that happens. The dashboards and tracking I've implemented can function as just a curiosity — a scoreboard by which I can track my lifetime progress in Vigil and the temperature in my home office. But they also provide so much more as a way for me to enrich my prompts, gather insights, and build more features.

A few things that are already changing because of what I can now see in the data include re-ordering the panels and tweaking the UI. I knew this intuitively, but the data in PostHog showed I opened Vigil more often than anything else. So, I asked Claude to create a shortcut. Now, I can tap the clock from any panel and it'll take me straight back to my knights' dreary adventure. 

Further updates are coming too. Right now, the numbers in Vigil's dashboard suggest I choose the Honorable option far more often than not – which suggests the moral tension I was hoping for isn't landing. When I get time I plan to rewrite many of the story beats, remove the Honor and Craven labels, and make the positions randomize. That way there won't always be an obviously good choice to lean on.

In other words, while the way I build is changing thanks to AI tools like Claude, product analytics remains an important part of the process and helps me decide what I'll build. The instrumentation is what lets me, and the AI I build with, keep something alive that neither of us could have written alone.

Also, my desk now tells me when the CO2 in the room is too high, which explains an enormous amount about my sleepy afternoons.
```

- A rotating daily joke, a random fractal, and a Sky panel showing the current moon phase, sunrise, and sunset.
<ImageSlider>

![joke panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/06_joke_0b212d071d.png) 

![moon panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/08_sky_2a93713f2a.png) 

![rps panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/03_rps_eb3d967928.png)

![oblique panel](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/04_oblique_7558fce9eb.png)

</ImageSlider>

The most ambitious part of Joe-OS was Vigil

It's a tiny medieval roguelike text adventure about a knight keeping watch over a dying realm. Every turn something happens — a ghoul rises, a house burns, a bandit approaches — and you respond by choosing an Honorable or a Craven option. Sometimes you get a third choice based on your inventory or companions, each of which has their own simple personality.

It runs across five acts and 400+ hand-written events, with a two-and-a-half minute cooldown between choices during which the world breathes by giving you a slow trickle of flavour events.

> When your knight finally dies, you choose their last words, and those words shape the knight who takes up the watch next. It is not a game you rush. It's something you keep half an eye on while you wait for a meeting to start and games are intended to last weeks.

Author: ```suggestion
When your knight finally dies, you choose their last words, and those words shape the knight who takes up the watch next. It is not a game you rush. It's something you keep half an eye on while you wait for meetings to start over the course of weeks.
```

So the more of my code an AI writes, the more I need something telling me — and it — what's actually happening. That's the opposite of what you'd assume. You'd think tools like Claude make analytics less necessary. For people like me, they make it _more_.

## Setting up PostHog

Which is why the last thing I added was PostHog.

There are a lot of ways to [install PostHog](/wizard), but I did this with one sentence: _"Add PostHog to track usage, games played, and errors."_

Claude wrote a small capture client that batches events in memory and ships them over WiFi without ever blocking the screen, then wired it through the whole OS. I pasted in a project key. That was the entirety of the install experience.

The more interesting part happened next, through the [PostHog MCP](/docs/model-context-protocol). With it, I never had to open the PostHog UI. I just asked, and Claude found my new project, confirmed events were arriving, built two pinned dashboards, and filled them with fifteen [insights](/docs/product-analytics/insights) – all from plain English.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

AI collapsed the gap between having an idea and shipping it. The MCP collapsed the gap between shipping it and understanding it — which, for someone like me, is the harder of the two.

```
